
Git Workflow Guide for a Distributed Development Team

Critical Thinking Project – Task 2
Source Code Management for a Distributed Development Team


---

1. Introduction

As the company transitions from a centralized VCS (SVN) to a distributed VCS (Git), the development team requires a structured workflow that supports collaboration, feature isolation, code review, and stable releases. This Git workflow guide defines how developers in different geographic locations can work simultaneously while maintaining a clean and reliable main branch.


---

2. Workflow Overview

The recommended workflow for this distributed team is a Feature Branch + Pull Request (PR) workflow, supported by integration testing before merging changes into the main branch.

This workflow includes:

A stable main branch

Feature branches for all new development

Pull requests (PRs) for code reviews

CI/CD integration tests triggered automatically

Protected main branch to prevent direct commits

Merge or rebase rules to keep history clean



---

3. Branching Strategy

3.1 Main Branch (main)

Always stable and deployable.

Protected against direct commits.

Only updated through approved pull requests.


3.2 Feature Branches (feature/<name>)

Created for new features, tasks, or bug fixes.

Always branched off from main.


Steps to create a feature branch:

git checkout main
git pull
git checkout -b feature/login-page

3.3 Optional Branches

These can be used depending on the team’s maturity:

develop — for Git Flow-style projects

release/x.x — for preparing releases

hotfix/x.x — for urgent production fixes


For this project, the team will mainly use:

✔ main
✔ feature/*


---

4. Pull Request (PR) Workflow

Pull requests are essential for collaboration, code review, and quality enforcement.

4.1 Steps in the PR Process

1. Developer finishes work on feature branch

git add .
git commit -m "Implemented login page UI"


2. Push branch to remote

git push -u origin feature/login-page


3. Open a Pull Request on GitHub/GitLab Include:

Description of the feature

Screenshots/logs if needed

List of changes and testing notes



4. Code Review

At least one other developer must approve

Comments must be resolved before merging



5. Automated Integration Testing

PR triggers CI pipeline

Tests must pass (unit tests, linting, build checks)



6. Merge the PR

Once approved and tests pass

Merging must be performed through a PR, not manually



7. Delete the feature branch
After merging, cleanup unused branches.




---

5. Integration Testing Before Merging

Integration testing ensures new features do not break the existing system.

Tests triggered by PR:

Unit tests

Build checks

Linting/style checks

API integration tests

UI tests (optional)


Why this helps a distributed team:

Ensures stable main branch

Detects issues early

Provides consistent quality across developers in different locations

Reduces merge conflicts and production bugs



---

6. Merging and Rebasing Best Practices

6.1 When to Merge

Use merge commits for large features with multiple collaborators.

Keeps a clear history of when features were completed.


git merge feature/login-page

6.2 When to Rebase

Use rebase for small branches before creating a PR.

Keeps commit history clean and linear.


Example:

git checkout feature/login-page
git pull --rebase origin main

6.3 Rules

Never rebase after your branch has been pushed and used by others.

Never rebase the main branch.



---

7. How This Workflow Supports a Distributed Team

Challenge	How the Workflow Solves It

Developers working in different time zones	Feature branching allows independent work without blocking others
Code quality must remain high	PRs ensure code review and testing before merge
Need for stable main branch	Protected branch rules prevent accidental changes
Risk of merge conflicts	Frequent rebasing and automated tests reduce conflicts
Collaboration across locations	PR comments and discussions centralize communication


This workflow creates a structured, scalable method for collaboration that fits a geographically distributed development environment.


---

8. Summary

This Git workflow provides:

A stable main branch

Isolated feature development

Mandatory pull requests for code review

Automated testing for continuous integration

Safe merging practices with optional rebasing


By following these practices, the team can confidently transition from SVN to Git and improve collaboration, code quality, and delivery speed across distributed teams.

